## Compiler Whack–A–Mole


### Background

For future purposes involving working on a compiler for a custom modelling language to LaTeX, I decided to practise building a compiler and getting my feet wet before diving in. I had previously built an interpreter (albeit a quite naïve tree-walk kind), I put on the back burner a low-level virtual machine implementation for the interpreter and took up a new task: a compiler. The interpreter I worked on was based quite heavily (I'll admit; maybe 98%) from the book *Crafting Interpreters* by Robert Nystrom. While it taught me the most essential concepts in programming language and interpreter design, it was a *managed* experience, in the sense that the book provided hand-holding for the entirety of the journey. I wanted something tethers-off: something from a blank canvas.

A digression (maybe not) here seemed apt. It is kind of scary when one opens a blank project directory – empty and cold (I know it's not metal) – and one's fingers don't move, not due to a lack of ability, but due to an apparent lack of direction and too many things getting in the way (potentially to avoid mistakes?), clouding one's mind. Yeah, it did happen to me. Although a few minutes of recollection of the most fundamental concepts from the book did help me get my right foot afoot. Certain cogs of the compiler/interpreter gearbox are invariant – they're like items on a checklist (the spawn configuration, if you will) that one needs to get done with: things like the tokeniser and the scanner.


### Why Lisp? (ughh... not again!)

While the interpreter journey was sort of guided, without having to wander off in search of concepts, for the book was pretty well-written and mostly self-contained, the compiler journey wasn't, for I had deliberately wanted it to not be so (Maybe I watched too many Tsoding streams and figured that it was the *cool* way? I don't know). I chose Lisp, specifically Common Lisp, for a few reasons. The first, and probably the most important, is its ridiculously simple grammar. I daresay that learning any reasonably popular Lisp dialect shouldn't take more than a few hours. There's so little syntax, thanks to its philosophy. In my understanding, everything in Lisp is either a list or an atom. That's it. A group of these quantities is always an expression. The expression is the only top-level Lisp statement. This screamed **Recursive Descent Parsing** to me, which luckily was a paradigm I was familiar with, thanks to the book. It so happened that I was on a marathon-watch of the B programming language compiler construction series from Tsoding, that I came across the incremental approach of compiler construction, the same one which a paper (by Abdulazziz Ghuloum) I had read a while ago advocated for. The philosophy boils down to two things – get a working compiler at each iteration and implement features on top of each other. I had also come across this intermediate representation method called **Three-Address Code** (TAC), which seemed to map very nicely to Asssembly (most variants). I did come across **Static Single-Assignment**, but the use of a **_Φ_**  function for resolving symbols across namespaces and the use of graph-colouring didn't seem like a realistic first-time IR target. Last time, I built the interpreter in C++, but decided to build the compiler in C, for I did not want to fight the language and focus purely on the construction (is it weird that I get less memory leak issues with C than with C++?).

With all these in mind, I wrote a Common Lisp 'Hello, World!' program and set out to make it compile. No more than two hours later, I had a basic hard-coded working scanner and parser. It could generate some measly Assembly in ARM64 and feed it to clang. I hadn't built an AST yet, because I wasn't sure if I needed to do that (yeah, sampling bias is real) looking at my small subset of programs (at this stage, you might as well term them 'string-printers'). Printing numbers was pretty easy – just load the format string and chuck the job off to libc.


### Global Variables

With a working toy printer up and running, I decided to move on to adding features of Lisp, one by one. The simplest I could find were global variable declarations or *defvars*. Now, I needed a tokeniser and an enumeration of all the possible token types I could scan. Next, I needed to get to the actual parser. The parser was quite simple and straightforward. I decided to build an AST with only one node type: node (cue mind-explosion). If a node had children, it was a list. If not, it was an atom; and token types were clearly not overlapping in these cases. I had a master function to compile a node of the tree, and it would dispatch the compilation to the appropriate function, based on whether it was a list or an atom. This is probably one of the instances where one gets to revel in the simplicity and beauty in the elegant solutions enabled by recursion. It didn't take long to generate a nice IR for global defvars. Next came Assembly, which was simple, since a global variable is a 64-bit word loaded from memory. One good thing about Apple's ARM64 Assembly is that it requires you to manually locate the page and page offset to fetch from memory, which coincided nicely with my course on Operating Systems back at college, so it was nothing new. A little while later, and I could already declare global variables – no big deal.


### Expressions

Ah! The heart of Lisp, where everything is an expression! It seemed quite difficult to implement that philosophy directly, so I borrowed a bit from imperative languages – statements and expressions; only here, statements were expressions that returned (null). It would tie in nicely with my IR. Again, the tokeniser was wired up to a few more tokens (arithmetic operators and such), and then came the parser, which didn't change much, considering that arithmetic expressions in Lisp are just lists, since they're operator-prefixed lists of operands. Next came the IR. This was where my *blitzkrieg* had to stop, and I had to look up things. I had to implement temporary registers, which would hold my intermediate values and results in the evaluation of arithmetic expressions. Since the IR is a fantasy language where there are infinite temporary registers, I just had to keep a counter and reset it per block. Here, I used a nice technique called folding. You know how in functional programming languages, there's usually a function called `foldl`? It takes an accumulator and squishes the evaluation of a list of operands by means of a function/operation into it (it folds to the left). Turns out, it's a neat way to implement arithmetic evaluation for a temporary register system with intermediate values being exchanged (just like the Fibonacci sequence) as the result gets evaluated. You end up with an accumulated result and a makeshift register, which are both returned and freed, respectively. Now, statements could be subsumed under expressions returning (null). Then came the big monster: Assembly, back with vengeance, for I had blissfully been ignoring its registers up until now. I needed a way to map the infinite temporary registers to the finite permissible ARM registers and spill over extra to the stack. A professional would have used graph-colouring to get this done, but I relied on a simple linear search. You only get eight registers (which is better than x86-64) and two shuttle registers. Then came along a simple fetch function, which would load an operand based on its type: integer or string (this was required since I was storing strings in the literals prologue as labelled symbols). A few days and I finally got it to work (thanks to great people who post free resources). Next up was the power function, which made me think libc was a jerk, because it clobbered the scratch registers, and so I had to save those to the stack, chuck the job off, yank the result back, and free the stack. Unbeknownst to me was that this subroutine would soon apply to every single call. A few examples revealed the lack of support for nested expressions, and that was taken care of in a few commits.


### NASM

I wanted to port my compiler to other platforms, since the IR was platform-agnostic. I didn't want to get bogged down in trying to learn another variant of Assembly just yet, so I chose a popular variant: the Netwide Assembler and use AI to generate the transpiler for me. A little debugging here and there, and that was out of the way. I did look at the Flat Assembler (FASM), but its syntax seemed too different from ARM that I decided to steer clear of it for now. Had I implemented for the GNU Assembler (GAS) first, FASM would've been a no-brainer.


### Scopes

Next came a big stage: scopes. During my previous interpreter build, scoping was probably one of the most time-consuming topic with the most material dedicated to it (the book even covered environments and closures). I ultimately decided to forego the classic parent-pointer tree structure for two reasons: I could use a flat table and store the depth, and this would give me an opportunity to study the STB implementations by Sean Barrett for data structures: in this case, dynamic arrays and hash tables, using a brilliant technique called 'the stretchy buffer'. I put it in, and I now had to start dealing with the stack and scoped variables. Since I was following a Lisp-2 paradigm, I threw in a symbol enumeration to mark dead symbols out of scope, and it was pretty much touchwood. I had to put in new syntax in my IR to recognise local variables under stack offsets. Again, came the subroutine of saving the stack frame and retrieving it after the block was done with. I implemented a simple backwards depth-based lookup, which might not be the most ideal way to do it. I had to defer the implementation of the traditional `let` Lisp block which has late binding and more complex properties that I did not want to deal with at the moment, an implemented the `let*` block first, as it had early-binding and made things much simpler. It didn't take long to realise that functions were just let blocks but with the list of bindings bound at runtime and supplied by a caller.


### Functions & Fat Pointers

This stage probably took me the longest to implement, and was probably what made this whole game of compiler construction akin to whack-a-mole. I would implement something, and it would either break something, or would require a complete rewiring of something already implemented and locked in place. Incredibly frustrating, but it taught a few nice things about Assembly. I couldn't do this all by myself, so I relied on AI to teach me important and/or common techniques in compiler design. I didn't implement lambdas yet, only *defuns*. I had to implement this subroutine of saving the stack frame, calling it and retrieving it. This time around, I had to juggle a bit with return values because I was seeing addresses being printed in my example programs. I used the STB hash tables for my function namespace (since functions don't need to preserve declaration order). It hit me that the dynamically typed nature of Lisp had then come to haunt me. Since Lisp is dynamically typed, you can only go so far with static type inference and checking. I either needed to rework IR (incredibly bad idea at this stage) or implement a technique *type tagging* at runtime. I chose the latter. I sought help from AI to learn about the methods in which one could implement type tagging, one of which included (the dreaded?) tagged unions. I finally settled on something simple: the registers `x0` for the return value and `x1` for the type tag (a number which indicated the type of the value). Now I was dealing with a 128-bit compound return value. As must be quite apparent by now, I ran into an inevitable issue – juggling with 128-bit values for functions and 64-bit values for the rest of the data. It seemed inevitable that I had to incorporate fat pointers for all the data in my program, else it would create a ripple effect which would break the architecture of my compiler due to convoluted type differences. I had to switch out all the data containers for fat pointers. Now, this created an issue: It halved the number of scratch registers I had, from eight to four. The penalty for dynamic typing is an accumulation of heaps of CPU clock cycles spent in runtime type dispatching. I had to massively increase my stack frames and pre-allocated spaces, which gave rise to another problem (going really strong for the whack-a-mole metaphor): my stack offset statements in Assembly broke, because they only supported 7-bit immediate values, i.e., –512 to 508. Since I was allocating massive offsets for the stack, I had to circumvent this by using the shuttle register to first load my huge offset and circumvent this by offsetting using that. Then came the dilemma of allowing large stack frames, which would reduce the number of frames allowed, or vice versa. I settled on one kilobyte frames, since it seemed like a sweet spot to support deep enough levels of recursion. A few label collision fixes later, I was done.


### Optimisation & Efficiency

While I have blatantly ignored any reasonable amount of optimisations in this design, I do plan to implement tail-call optimisation and optimisation for jumping around on the stack. One of the reasons I couldn't inject any optimisations is the simple lack of the source code at hand during compilation. I chose a very early method of compiler design. Instead of holding a large (potentially reaching :gigabytes) AST in memory, I would start building an AST when I encountered a global block (at zero depth), finish its tips when I closed the block, and feed it to the compiler. Then, I would immediately chuck it out of memory once done. This makes for a nice single-pass compiler with a small memory footprint.


### Links & References

- [https://www.github.com/AnishBramha/lispc]()
- [https://craftinginterpreters.com/]()
- [https://github.com/nothings/stb]()
- [http://scheme2006.cs.uchicago.edu/11-ghuloum.pdf]()
- [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-address_code]()
- [https://github.com/bext-lang/b]()
- [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fold_(higher-order_function)]()







